# LEWG [[nodiscard]] policy

**Document number**: P3162R0
**Date**: 2024-02-22
**Authors**: Darius Neațu \<dariusn@adobe.com\>, David Sankel \<dsankel@adobe.com\>
**Audience**: Library Evolution

## Abstract
The committee spends substantial time deciding whether or not *[[nodiscard]]* is appropriate for newly introduced standard functions, and the decisions made are often incoherent. We propose a policy that results in minimal syntactic overhead while retaining the detection of the most egregious defects.

<table>
    <tr><th>Examples illustrating proposed policy</th></tr>
<tr><td>
        
```cpp
// 'empty' is frequently confused with 'clear' by those new to C++.
[[nodiscard]] bool map<T>::empty() const noexcept;

// Discarding the return value of 'new' is always a memory leak.
[[nodiscard]] void* operator new(size_t);

// Discarding the return value of 'operator==' is not a frequent bug
// nor sufficiently catastrophic to justify [[nodiscard]].
template<class T, size_t N>
constexpr bool operator==(const array<T, N>& x, const array<T, N>& y);

// Discarding an 'expected' return value hides errors and marking the class
// [[nodiscard]] requires little syntactic overhead.
template<class T, class E>
class [[nodiscard]] expected { ... };
```
</td></tr>
</table>

## Introduction

*[[nodiscard]]* was introduced in Andrew Tomazos's [*Proposal of [[unused]], [[nodiscard]] and [[fallthrough]] attributes (P0068R0)*](https://wg21.link/P0068R0) as a way to generate compiler warnings when *[[nodiscard]]*-marked functions (or functions with *[[nodiscard]]*-marked return types) are called without handling their return values. The feature was standardized in C++17 with [*Wording for [[nodiscard]] attribute (P0189R1)*](https://wg21.link/P0189R1).

As a rule, the standard encourages but does not mandate compiler warnings. *[[nodiscard]]* is no exception. This fact, combined with the as-if rule[^2], implies standard library implementers are not bound at all by where the C++ standard uses *[[nodiscard]]* annotations. Despite this implementor freedom, annotations were added to the standard library in C++17 with Nicolai Josuttis's [*[[nodiscard]] in the Library (P0600R1)*](https://wg21.link/P0600R1). Josuttis proposed *[[nodiscard]]* placement as follows:

* For existing APIs:
   * not using the return value always is a “huge mistake” (e.g., always resulting in resource leak)
   * not using the return value is a source of trouble and easily can happen (not obvious that something is wrong)
* For new APIs (not been in the C++ standard yet):
   * not using the return value is usually an error. 
    
[^2]: For details on the "as-if" rule, see paragraph 1 of [intro.abstract] in the [December 2023 C++ Working Draft (N4971)](https://wg21.link/N4971) and its footnote 
    
Following P0600R1's incorporation, the committee has not consistently followed Josuttis's recommendation for new APIs. Without an official policy, each new function's *[[nodiscard]]* annotation was subject to a separate debate, resulting in the present standard's *[[nodiscard]]* incoherence^[For a recent example, see the 2023 Kona discussion on *[[nodiscard]]* placement for [*Extend <bit> header function with overloads for std::simd (P2993R1)*](https://wg21.link/P2993R1)] and time-consuming LEWG discussions^[LEWG related papers: Christopher Di Bella's [P2377R0: [[nodiscard]] in the Standard Library: Clause 23 Iterators library](https://wg21.link/P2377R0), Ville Voutilainen's [D2422R0: Remove nodiscard annotations from the standard library specification](https://isocpp.org/files/papers/D2422R0.html), Hana Dusíková's [P2351R0: Mark all library static cast wrappers as nodiscard]( https://wg21.link/P2351R0).].


To resolve inconsistencies and reduce committee debate time, we advocate for the following LEWG policy:

> 1. Place *[[nodiscard]]* on functions where ignoring a return value is inevitably a severe defect, such as resource leakage.
> 2. Place *[[nodiscard]]* on functions where overlooking the return value is a common mistake, such as function names frequently confused with others.
> 3. Place *[[nodiscard]]* on types designed to communicate errors as function return values.

This paper discusses the principles driving this policy, surveys existing practices, considers alternatives, and proposes wording for SD-9.

## Principles

No *[[nodiscard]]* policy can address all concerns, so we propose guiding principles to aid decision-making: minimize complexity, focus on the 90% use case, and center on outcomes.

###  Minimize complexity

Minimizing C++'s complexity makes it more approachable for new users and reduces the maintenance burden of written code, thus improving its longevity. This principle rules out placing *[[nodiscard]]* on almost all functions with non-void return types, even if ignoring these return values is likely a bug.

### Focus on the 90% use case

Focusing on the 90% use case recognizes that concentrating on most people's problems rather than all people's problems will generally produce better outcomes, especially when simplicity is at stake. In this case, a handful of *[[nodiscard]]*'s placements is sufficient to generate warnings for the most common and severe bugs.
    
Consider these examples:

```cpp
std::vector<int> v{...};
v.empty();                  // Using 'clear' instead of 'empty' is a
                            // common bug, especially for those coming from
                            // another language.

std::unique_ptr<X> x{...};
x.release();                // Releasing the 'unique_ptr' in this example
                            // results in a memory leak.

std::async(job_x, &x, ...); // Accidentally ignoring the return value of
std::async(job_y, &y, ...); // async gives the false impression that jobs
                            // are run in parallel.

calloc(size * sizeof(int)); // Ignoring the return value of calloc is
                            // a memory leak.
```

### Center on outcomes
    
Centering on outcomes is about considering the practical impact of a decision. What impact will a *[[nodiscard]]* policy have? We've identified two:
    
1. **Standard library implementations**. Implementors are not obligated to follow *[[nodiscard]]* guidance. libstdc++ and Visual C++ make their own decisions^[Note [libstdc++'s placement](https://github.com/gcc-mirror/gcc/blob/3232ebd91ed55b275b9d5a6e8355336382c4afd5/libstdc%2B%2B-v3/include/bits/stl_vector.h#L1073) of *[[nodiscard]]* on both *vector::capacity* and *vector::empty* where the standard has placement only on the latter. The same is true for [Visual C++](https://github.com/microsoft/STL/blob/c53ac59abae552e50654943f7f80f23376a8039a/stl/inc/vector#L1866)], but libc++ mimics the standard's placement^[See *vector::empty()* and *vector::capacity()* [inside libc++](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/2167881f5154823dc3183845700add7df15fc856/libcxx/include/vector#L601).]. The impact here is minimal.
2. **Training content**. Training, books, and websites, including the incredibly popular [cppreference.com](https://cppreference.com/), frequently reproduce function signatures in the standard library. These signatures, as a result, heavily influence coding style.
    
Whether or not the standard is *intended* to impact coding style, *it does* and the committee should pay attention to this impact. Do we want the standard to encourage, by example, a conservative placement of *[[nodiscard]]* annotations, placement of *[[nodiscard]]* almost everywhere, or to avoid using the feature entirely? It is our position that users are best served by the former.


## Survey of existing practice

This section surveys existing *[[nodiscard]]* placement in the standard library, tooling, and the C++ Core guidelines. In short, the standard lacks consistency, tooling tends towards warning on all unused returns, and the C++ Core Guidelines have little to say on the subject. It is no wonder that users are frequently perplexed about what to do with the feature^[See this [stackoverflow discussion](https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/363169/whats-the-reason-for-not-using-c17s-nodiscard-almost-everywhere-in-new-c) for an example].

### The standard library
    
The code snippets below show various signatures that either get or do not get the *[[nodiscard]]* attribute in the [December 2023 C++ Working Draft (N4971)](https://wg21.link/N4971) 

* `.empty()` (~30 occurrences)

```cpp
// containers deque, list, map, ... , unordered_map, unordered_set
[[nodiscard]] bool map<T>::empty() const noexcept;
// utilities: basic_stacktrace, path, ...
[[nodiscard]] bool path<T>::empty() const noexcept;
// string types: basic_string_view, basic_string
[[nodiscard]] constexpr bool basic_string_view<T>::empty() const noexcept;
```

This addresses *.empty()*'s confusion with *.clear()*. All *.empty()* instances were marked as *[[nodiscard]]*.

* Allocation functions (~20 occurrences)
```cpp
// C++ allocation functions: marked as [[nodiscard]]
// * operator new overloads:
[[nodiscard]] void* operator new(size_t);
[[nodiscard]] void* operator new[](size_t);
// * allocate() overloads
[[nodiscard]] constexpr T* allocator<T>allocate(size_t n);
[[nodiscard]] void* pmr::allocate(size_t bytes, size_t alignment = max_align);
```

Discarding a value returned by an allocation function is undoubtedly a memory leak.
    
* `async`(2 occurrences)

```cpp
// async overloads
template<class F, class... Args>
[[nodiscard]] future<...> async(F&& f, Args&&... args);
```

Not capturing the return value for `async` results in surprising synchronous execution.

* Standard error types (0 occurrences) - 
```cpp
template<class T, class E>
class expected { ... };
template<class E>
class unexpected { ... };

class error_code { ... };
class error_condition { ... };
enum class errc { ... };
```
None of the standard error types have a *[[nodiscard]]* attribute.

* Inconsistencies
```cpp
// allocation functions
// * default: do have [[nodiscard]]
[[nodiscard]] void* operator new(size_t);
// * exceptions: C allocation functions
void* malloc(size_t size);
void* calloc(size_t nmemb, size_t size);
void* realloc(void* ptr, size_t size);    

// operator==
// * default: does not have [[nodiscard]]
constexpr bool operator==(const vector<...>& x, const vector<...>& y);
constexpr bool operator==(const basic_string<...>& lhs, const basic_string<...>& rhs) noexcept;
// * exceptions: few new APIs
[[nodiscard]] friend bool operator==(const stop_token& lhs, const stop_token& rhs) noexcept;
[[nodiscard]] friend bool operator==(const stop_source& lhs, const stop_source& rhs) noexcept;

// get_id() for threads
// * (old) free function API
id this_thread::get_id() noexcept;
// * (new) member function API
[[nodiscard]] id jthread::get_id() const noexcept;
```

### Tooling: Clang Tidy

Clang Tidy provides the [modernize-use-nodiscard](https://clang.llvm.org/extra/clang-tidy/checks/modernize/use-nodiscard.html) flag, which suggests and automatically applies *[[nodiscard]]* to a codebase in specific scenarios, such as non-void non-template return const member function.
```cpp
bool class_name::empty() const;      // warning: should be marked [[nodiscard]]
bool class_name::check(int i) const; // warning: should be marked [[nodiscard]]
```

Moreover, the experimental flag [bugprone-unused-return-value](https://clang.llvm.org/extra/clang-tidy/checks/bugprone/unused-return-value.html) generates warnings when a user ignores the return value of specific Standard Library functions. An example is *std::unique_ptr::release()*, which may be confused with *std::unique_ptr::reset()*. 
    

Similarly to our proposed policy, this tool warns when standard error type return values are not handled:
```cpp
// warning: the value returned by this function should be used
std::expected<int, int> foo() { return {1}; }

void bar() { foo(); }
```

### The C++ Core Guidelines

A recent GitHub issue in the [C++ Core Guidelines](https://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines) repository, [[[nodiscard]] advice is largely absent](https://github.com/isocpp/CppCoreGuidelines/issues/2109), points out that the C++ Core Guidelines does not mention *[[nodiscard]]* aside from not ignoring results of functions with this attribute. Considering section SL.2 ("[SL.2: Prefer the standard library to other libraries](https://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines#Rsl-sl)"), the missing guideline from C++ Core Guidelines should be consistent with a LEWG policy.

The dicussion led to multiple possible guidelines that are still under debate:

> A: Add [[nodiscard]] when it disambiguates what a function does or discarding the result is a safety issue.
> B: Add [[nodiscard]] when it is likely to avoid the misuse of a function.
> C: Add [[nodiscard]] when a function is impossible to use when the caller discards the result.
> D: Add [[nodiscard]] when discarding the result of a function with side effects is not intended.

The guideline *A* uses the attribute only for critical situations (e.g., *.empty()*). In the opposite direction, the *B* version suggests to put *[[nodiscard]]* almost everywhere (e.g., even on *operator==*). The *C* wording limits the usage to specific cases where code may break (e.g., *std::launder*, *std::async*), while *D* aims to use *[[nodiscard]]* only on functions with side-effects, such *read()*.


## Alternatives considered
    
1. **Place *[[nodiscard]]* on every function where discarding the result is likely a bug**. Because this would result in *[[nodiscard]]* placement on almost every non-*void* returning function, it goes against the principle of minimizing complexity.
    
2. **Do not use *[[nodiscard]]* in the standard library**. This alternative goes against the principle of centering on outcomes. If people do not see *[[nodiscard]]* used in the standard library or relevant documentation (such as cppreference), then the positive impact the feature can have is diminished.
  
## Wording for SD-9


Append to [List of Standard Library Policies](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2023/p2267r1.html#list-of-standard-library-policies) section of SD-9 ([P2267R1: Library Evolution Policies](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2023/p2267r1.html)):

> X. **[[nodiscard]]** policy:
> X.1. (P3162R0) Place *[[nodiscard]]* on functions where ignoring a return value is inevitably a severe defect, such as resource leakage.
> X.2. (P3162R0) Place *[[nodiscard]]* on functions where overlooking the return value is a common mistake, such as function names frequently confused with others.
> X.3. (P3162R0) Place *[[nodiscard]]* on types designed to communicate errors as function return values.

## Conclusion

This paper demonstrated the need for a policy regulating *[[nodiscard]]* use in the standard library and proposed such a policy. It outlined the principles motivating this policy, analyzed existing practices, and considered alternatives.

## References

- Christopher Di Bella. P2377R0: [[nodiscard]] in the Standard Library: Clause 23 Iterators library. https://wg21.link/P2377R0, 05/2021 
- Hana Dusíková. P2351R0: Mark all library static cast wrappers as [[nodiscard]]. https://wg21.link/P2351R0, 04/2020
- Nicolai Josuttis. P0600R1: [[nodiscard]\] in the Library, Rev1.
  https://wg21.link/p0600r1, 11/2017.
- Inbal Levi et al. P2267R1: Library Evolution Policies.
- Andrew Tomazos. P0189R1: Wording for [[nodiscard]\] attribute.
  https://wg21.link/p0189r1, 2/2016.
- Andrew Tomazos. P0068R0: Proposal of [[unused]\], [[nodiscard]\] and [[fallthrough]] attributes. https://wg21.link/p0068r0, 9/2015.
- Daniel Towner, Ruslan Arutyunyan. P2993R1: Extend `<bit>` header function with overloads for `std::simd`. https://wg21.link/P2933R1, 8/2023
  https://wg21.link/P2267R1, 11/2023
- Ville Voutilainen. D2422R0: Remove nodiscard annotations from the standard library specification. https://isocpp.org/files/papers/D2422R0.html, 08/2021.